---
title: Ruby on Rails Basics
description: A brief introduction to Ruby on Rails and how we use it here at OSI.
---

**Purpose**: To make you comfortable with how Rails operates, so that you can make any necessary changes to CreativeQ as they come up.

**Background**: Ruby is a programming language developed by a Japanese computer scientist. It is unique in its lack of braces and semi-colons, indentation-based syntax, and extremely expressive nature. Rails is a framework of Ruby code that makes it easy to build web applications. We use Ruby on Rails (also just called Rails) as the framework for CreativeQ, our work order management system.

**Caveats**: It is **not** reasonable to expect new web designers to know or learn Rails; if it were, it might be part of the job description. I don't expect you to become an expert overnight, but I do want to provide you with the tools to make small changes and updates to CreativeQ as needed. Here, more than anywhere else, please [e-mail me](mailto:web@aj-foster.com) if you need anything.

---

### Quick Overview

A Rails application is built around models, the nouns of your app. For example, in CreativeQ, the models are User, Order, Organization, and Assignment. These are the "things" that need to interact with one another.

Actions are defined using controllers. For example, the Orders controller has actions like `index`, `show`, `edit`, and `claim`. These translate into URLs, like `.../orders` and `.../orders/1/edit`. Rails provides the mechanisms to translate URLs and HTTP verbs (GET, POST, etc.) into actions.

The user interacts with views. In Rails, views often have the extension `.html.erb`. This means they are essentially HTML documents with embedded / evaluated Ruby code - not all that different than page templates in Wordpress, which are HTML documents with embedded PHP code.

A Rails application sits on top of a database (in our case, a PostgreSQL database). Unlike a Wordpress site, the structure of the database is tailored to the application; each table corresponds to a model.

---

### Application Hosting

Because a Rails application is Ruby code, we need a server to translate between HTTP requests and Ruby. For development purposes, Rails has a built-in server (WEBrick), but using this would require users to use a separate port (http://...:3000/...). The best solution is to have the Rails application run concurrently with Apache.

To accomplish this, we use a Ruby gem called Phusion Passenger. Passenger handles the startup of the application and the translation of requests. The configuration goes in the site's config file in `/etc/apache2/sites-available`. Here's a sample, from CreativeQ's configuration:

{% highlight bash %}
<VirtualHost *:80>

    ServerName osi.ucf.edu

    (...)

    Alias /creativeq /var/www/creativeq-app/public

    <Location /creativeq>
        PassengerBaseURI /creativeq
        PassengerAppRoot /var/www/creativeq-app
    </Location>

    <Directory /var/www/creativeq-app>
        Options -MultiViews
    </Directory>

</VirtualHost>
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, CreativeQ is located in `/var/www/creativeq-app` and we want to access it via `http://osi.ucf.edu/creativeq`.

For more about the configuration of Passenger, see the [Passenger Users Guide](https://www.phusionpassenger.com/documentation/Users%20guide%20Apache.html).

---

### Writing Ruby

Ruby is a very expressive language, and writing it can feel like poetry compared to a language like C. Here's a sample of code from CreativeQ's Orders controller:

{% highlight ruby %}
def approve
    @order = Order.find(params[:id])

    unless can? :approve, @order
        return redirect_to @order, alert: "You aren't allowed to approve this order."
    end

    @order.status = "Unclaimed" if @order.status == "Unapproved"
    @order.save
    
    respond_to do |format|
        format.js
    end
end
{% endhighlight %}

My advice to you is that you look through the existing CreativeQ code and check out `http://tryruby.org` for some quick practice.

---

For more details about CreativeQ, and examples of some common tasks relate to its maintenance, check out the [Managing CreativeQ]({{ site.url }}/creativeq/creativeq.html) guide.