---
title: Managing Apache
description: Details about how Apache operates and how you can configure it.
---

**Purpose**: To give insight into how Apache works and make you comfortable with its configuration.

**Background**: Apache accepts web traffic and serves web pages and assets to visitors. We use Apache because it is the most popular web server, and you're likely to find any help you need online.

---

### Overview

Apache accepts web traffic on port 80 of the server, the standard HTTP port, and port 443, the usual HTTPS port. It performs any necessary processing (for example, running PHP files) and gives the visitor the results.

Incoming traffic is routed one of various Virtual Hosts. Here at OSI, we make one Virtual Host for each domain name the server accepts traffic for. As an example, the live server might have these virtual hosts:

* sdesosiweb1.sdes.ucf.edu (default)
* osi.ucf.edu
* tedxucf.org

As a convention, each domain / virtual host has its own directory inside of `/var/www`. This helps us to always know which site we're editing, and how to view it. *Note: Web Apps get their own directories as well, even though they may be a part of a different virtual host.*

Every virtual host has its own configuration file in `/etc/apache2/sites-available`. In all, we can differentiate "sites" in the following ways:

* Domain name
* Virtual Host configuration in `/etc/apache2/sites-available`
* Directory in `/var/www`

Apache also has modules that extend its functionality. For example, `mod_rewrite` is a module that Wordpress requires. It allows traffic to a given URL to be re-routed somewhere else without the user knowing the difference (Wordpress routes all traffic to `index.php`; the URL you see in your browser is fake).

Sites are enabled / disabled using the terminal commands `sudo a2ensite [site]` and `sudo a2dissite [site]`. Modules are similarly enabled / disabled with `sudo a2enmod [module]` and `sudo a2dismod [module]`.

---

### Virtual Host

Virtual Host configuration files can be found in `/etc/apache2/sites-available`. Here's the configuration file for a simple site, `tedxucf.org`:

{% highlight bash %}
<VirtualHost *:80>

	ServerAdmin osiweb@ucf.edu
	ServerName tedxucf.org
	ServerAlias www.tedxucf.org

	DocumentRoot /var/www/tedxucf

	<Directory /var/www/tedxucf>
		Options -Indexes +FollowSymLinks
		AllowOverride All
		Order allow,deny
		allow from all
	</Directory>

	ErrorLog /var/www/tedxucf/error.log

	# Possible values include: debug, info, notice, warn, error, crit,
	# alert, emerg.
	LogLevel debug

	CustomLog ${APACHE_LOG_DIR}/access.log combined

</VirtualHost>
{% endhighlight %}

Let's break it down:

* `<VirtualHost *:80>` defines a new virtual host that listens on port 80. You can also define one for `*:443` if you want to accept connections.
* `ServerAdmin osiweb@ucf.edu` defines which e-mail to display on the default error pages.
* `ServerName tedxucf.org` is the primary address for which you want to accept traffic.
* `ServerAlias www.tedxucf.org` defines any other addresses for which you'd like to accept traffic. You can have multiple aliases separated by spaces on one line.
* `DocumentRoot /var/www/tedxucf` tells Apache to look for and serve files in this directory.
* `<Directory /var/www/tedxucf>` begins a set of instructions on how to treat files and traffic in `/var/www/tedxucf`.
	* `Options -Indexes +FollowSymLinks` tells Apache to allow traffic to access symlinked files, but not to show indexes of files if no `index.html` file is present. As a security concern, we don't allow visitors to see the index of files in any directory.
	* `AllowOverride All` allows us to put `.htaccess` files in this directory or its subdirectories to modify Apache's behavior. `AllowOverride` wouldn't be a good idea if we didn't control the contents of the `.htaccess` files.
	* The remaining lines determine access to the files.
* `ErrorLog /var/log/apache2/tedxucf.log` determines where Apache will log events related to this virtual host, and `LogLevel debug` tells it how much to log.
* `CustomLog ${APACHE_LOG_DIR}/access.log combined` tells Apache to log site accesses to a combined log for every site.

If you look in other configuration files in `/etc/apache2/sites-available` you'll likely find one that has a `<Directory />` block. The configuration within this block is meant to restrict access to areas outside of `/var/www` by default.

---

### Initial Setup

Here's a quick outline of the steps that were taken in order to set up Apache.

**Enable mod_rewrite**

`mod_rewrite`, as mentioned above, allows traffic to be redirected around the server without the user noticing. Wordpress uses this extensively: when you create a page in Wordpress, that page doesn't exist as a file. Wordpress rewrites all traffic to index.php, which parses the request and delivers the correct content.

Enabling `mod_rewrite` is simple: just run `sudo a2enmod rewrite` and `sudo service apache2 restart`. You can check the results by running `apachectl -t -D DUMP_MODULES` and looking for "rewrite_module".

**Allow `.htaccess`**

We also need to tell Apache to allow configuration using `.htaccess` files. This occurs in the `/etc/apache2/sites-available` configuration files:

{% highlight bash %}
<Directory /var/www/(...)>
	...
	AllowOverride All
</Directory>
{% endhighlight %}

`AllowOverride All` allows `.htaccess` files to modify Apache's behavior in that directory. Be careful not to allow this behavior for anything outside of `/var/www`. After making this change, you'll need to run `sudo service apache2 restart`.

The remainder of the Apache-related setup involves modifying the permissions of `/var/www`. This is covered in [another document]({{ site.url }}/server/file-permissions.html).